Rework the compiler toolchain docs (#334)
matter-labs/zksync-web-era-docs: docs/dev/compiler-toolchain/solidity.md

# Solidity

The compiler we provide as a part of our toolchain is called [zksolc](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksolc-bin). It
operates on IRs and metadata received from the underlying [solc](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/) compiler,
which must be available in `$PATH`, or the path must be explicitly passed via the CLI (command-line interface).

## Usage

Most of the time, using our compiler via the hardhat plugin is enough, and you do not have to dive deeper into its

> interface and I/O (input/output) methods. However, it can be crucial for integration, debugging, or contribution purposes.

Author: I feel like `knowledge` usually refers to an expertise, area, or even industry.
But for more grounded things like an interface of a small tool, `understanding` or a word alike should be more common.

> interface and I/O (input/output) methods. However, it can be crucial for integration, debugging, or contribution purposes.

Reviewer: to know something vs to understand something ... equal terms really..

The CLI supports several I/O modes:

1. Standard JSON
2. Combined JSON
3. Free-form output

> All three modes use the standard JSON `solc` interface internally. It helps to reduce the complexity of the `zksolc`

Author: Does it imply that its the standard JSON interface helps to reduce the complexity?
It is not the interface itself, but the fact that we're using it in all three I/O modes.

> All three modes use the standard JSON `solc` interface internally. It helps to reduce the complexity of the `zksolc`

Reviewer: Your original sentence has the implication of the question yes. My correction fixes that to align with your second sentence.

interface and facilitate testing.

#### Standard JSON

The `zksolc` standard JSON I/O workflow closely follows that of the official `solc` compiler. However, `zksolc` does not
support a significant part of it, as it only makes sense for compiling for EVM, and has no representation in the zkEVM

> architecture.

Author: No-no.
1. It is a significant part of the standard JSON, not of `solc`.
2. And this part is not compiled for the EVM. It provides settings, and a significant part of those settings can only configure EVM, so we do not support that part.

Additional zkEVM data is supported by `zksolc`, but omitted when passed to `solc`:

- `settings/optimizer/enabled`: enables the LLVM optimizer. Disabling only makes sense for prototyping and debugging
- `settings/optimizer/mode`: sets the optimization mode. Available values: `0`, `1`, `2`, `3`, `s`, `z`. The default
setting is `3`. See [LLVM optimizer](./llvm.md#optimizer).

Unsupported sections of the input JSON, ignored by `zksolc`:

- `sources/<file>/urls`
- `sources/destructible`
- `settings/stopAfter`
- `settings/remappings`
- `settings/optimizer/*`: the `solc` optimizer is always enabled and is not configurable
- `settings/evmVersion`
- `settings/debug`
- `settings/metadata`: we request metadata with default settings for consistency
- `settings/outputSelection/def`
- `settings/modelChecker`

Additional zkEVM data inserted by `zksolc`:

- `long_version`: the full `solc` version output
- `zk_version`: the version of the `zksolc` itself
- `contract/hash`: the hash of the zkEVM bytecode

> - `contract/factory_dependencies`: bytecode hashes of contracts `CREATE`d in the current one. [More detail here](../building-on-zksync/contracts/contract-deployment.md#note-on-factory-deps)

Author: Please use the same wording as in the other page.

> - `contract/factory_dependencies`: bytecode hashes of contracts `CREATE`d in the current one. [More detail here](../building-on-zksync/contracts/contract-deployment.md#note-on-factory-deps)

Reviewer: done (more or less) -> I couldn't find the original change ... we'll get this process more streamlined in future :)

Unsupported sections of the output JSON, ignored by `zksolc`:

- `contracts/<file>/<contract>/evm/bytecode`: replaced by the zkEVM object with only relevant data
- `contracts/<file>/<contract>/ewasm`

See the complete standard JSON data structures in [the zksolc repository](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-compiler-solidity/tree/main/src/solc/standard_json).

#### Combined JSON

The `zksolc` combined JSON I/O workflow closely follows that of the official `solc` compiler. However, `zksolc` does not
support a significant part of it, as it only makes sense for compiling for EVM, and has no representation in the zkEVM

> architecture.

Author: Same as [here](https://github.com/matter-labs/zksync-web-era-docs/pull/334/files#r1144216440).

> architecture.

Reviewer: done

The combined JSON is a mere output format, and there is no input combined JSON format. Instead, the CLI arguments are
used for configuration.

Additional zkEVM data, inserted by `zksolc`:

> - `zk_version`: the version of the `zksolc` itself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `zk_version`: the version of `zksolc`.
```

> - `contract/factory_deps`: bytecode hashes of contracts `CREATE`d in the current one. [More detail here](../building-on-zksync/contracts/contract-deployment.md#note-on-factory-deps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `contract/factory_deps`: bytecode hashes of contracts; `CREATE`d currently. [More details here](../building-on-zksync/contracts/contract-deployment.md#note-on-factory-deps).
```

Author: Please sync.

Reviewer: done

Unsupported combined JSON flags, rejected by `zksolc`:

- `function-debug`
- `function-debug-runtime`
- `generated-sources`
- `generated-sources-runtime`
- `opcodes`
- `srcmap`
- `srcmap-runtime`

> See the complete combined JSON data structures in [the zksolc repository](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-compiler-solidity/tree/main/src/solc/combined_json)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see the complete combined JSON data structures in [the zksolc repository](https://github.com/matter-labs/era-compiler-solidity/tree/main/src/solc/combined_json).
```

#### Free-form output

> This output format is utilized in Yul and LLVM IR compilation modes. These modes only support compiling a single file at
> the moment. Only `--asm` and `--bin` output flags are supported, so this mode can be useful for debugging and prototyping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This output format is utilized in Yul and LLVM IR compilation modes. These modes currently only support compiling a single file. Only `--asm` and `--bin` output flags are supported, so this mode can be useful for debugging and prototyping.
```

#### CLI reference

- `--version`  
  Print the version and exit.  

- `<input_files>`  
  Specify the input file paths.  
  Multiple Solidity files can be passed in the default Solidity mode.  
  Yul and LLVM IR modes currently support only a single file.  

- `--base-path <path>`  
  Set the given path as the root of the source tree instead of the root of the filesystem.  
  Passed to `solc` without changes.  

- `--include-path <path>`  

>   Make an additional source directory available to the default import callback. Can be used multiple times. Can only be used if the base path has a non-empty value.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Make an additional source directory available to the default import callback. Use multiple times if required. Only use if the base path has a non-empty value.  
```

  Passed to `solc` without changes.  

- `--allow-paths <path1,path2,...>`  

>   Allow a given path for imports. A list of paths can be supplied by separating them with a comma.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Allow a given path for imports. Supply a list of paths by separating them with a comma.  
```

Author: The same issue with `can be` here.
Sounds like supplying a list is required. A single path is also fine and more common. The comma separation is only needed if you are passing more than one.
Just adding a meaning of `if required` looks good to me.

Reviewer: yes, i'm keen to remove all passive tense ... updated suggestion ..

  Passed to `solc` without changes.  

- `-o`, `--output-dir <path>`  
  Create one file per component and contract/file at the specified directory, if given.  

- `--overwrite`  
  Overwrite existing files (used together with -o).  

- `-O`, `--optimization <level>`  
  Set the optimization parameter -O[0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | s | z].  
  Use `3` for best performance and `z` for minimal size. See [LLVM optimizer](./llvm.md#optimizer).  

- `--solc <path>`  
  Specify the path to the `solc` executable. By default, the one in `${PATH}` is used.  

>   Yul mode: `solc` is used for source code validation, as `zksolc` itself assumes that the input Yul is valid.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Yul mode: `solc` is used for source code validation, as `zksolc` assumes that the input Yul is valid.  
```

  LLVM IR mode: `solc` is unused.  

- `-l`, `--libraries <string>`  
  Specify addresses of deployable libraries. Syntax: `<libraryName>=<address> [, or whitespace] ...`.  
  Addresses are interpreted as hexadecimal strings prefixed with `0x`.  

- `--combined-json <options>`  
  Output a single JSON document containing the specified information.  
  Available arguments: `abi`, `hashes`, `metadata`, `devdoc`, `userdoc`, `storage-layout`, `ast`, `asm`, `bin`, `bin-runtime`.  

- `--standard-json`  
  Switch to standard JSON input/output mode. Read from stdin, write the result to stdout.  

>   This is the default used by the hardhat plugin.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This is the default used by the Hardhat plugin.  
```

- `--yul`  
  Switch to the Yul mode.  
  Only one input Yul file is allowed.  
  Cannot be used with the combined and standard JSON modes.  

- `--llvm-ir`  
  Switch to the LLVM IR mode.  
  Only one input LLVM IR file is allowed.  
  Cannot be used with the combined and standard JSON modes.  

- `--force-evmla`  

>   Forcibly switch to the EVM legacy assembly pipeline.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Force switch to the EVM legacy assembly pipeline.  
```

>   It is useful for older revisions of `solc` 0.8, where Yul was considered highly experimental and contained more bugs than today.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Useful for older revisions of `solc` 0.8, where Yul was considered highly experimental and contained more bugs than today.  
```

Reviewer: revisions?

Author: In SemVer it is actually called `patch` (the 3rd number in 0.8.19), but this term is a little ambiguous as it can refer to any change made to any program, like a commit in the official repo or even something kept on someone's local machine and applied privately before usage.

Revision is a little broader term although not entirely correct when describing SemVer, but it more precisely describes the solc entities we're referring to.

Reviewer: would version be a better term?

Author: I prefer 'revision', because we have 0.8 as a version in this sentence; and revision is 'smaller' than version, that is one version can have many revisions.

Reviewer: ok sgtm

- `--system-mode`  
  Enable the system contract compilation mode.  
  In this mode, zkEVM extensions are enabled. For example, calls to addresses `0xFFFF` and below are substituted by special  
  zkEVM instructions. In the Yul mode, the `verbatim_*` instruction family is available.  

- `--asm`  
  Output zkEVM assembly of the contracts.  

- `--bin`  
  Output zkEVM bytecode of the contracts.  

- `--debug-output-dir <path>`  
  Dump all IRs to files in the specified directory.  
  Only for testing and debugging.

- `--llvm-verify-each`  
  Set the verify-each option in LLVM.  
  Only for testing and debugging.

- `--llvm-debug-logging`  
  Set the debug-logging option in LLVM.  
  Only for testing and debugging.

## Limitations

> For the time being Solidity versions as old as `>=0.4.12` are supported, though **we strongly recommend using** the latest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the current time, Solidity versions as old as `>=0.4.12` are supported, though **we strongly recommend using** the latest
```

- `settings/stopAfter`
- `settings/remappings`
- `settings/optimizer/*`: the `solc` optimizer is always enabled and is not configurable.
- `settings/evmVersion`
- `settings/debug`
- `settings/metadata`: we request metadata with default settings for consistency.
- `settings/outputSelection/def`
- `settings/modelChecker`

Additional zkEVM data inserted by `zksolc`:

<<<<<<< HEAD
- `long_version`: the full `solc` version output
- `zk_version`: the version of the `zksolc` itself
- `contract/hash`: the hash of the zkEVM bytecode
- `contract/factory_dependencies`: bytecode hashes of contracts `CREATE`d in the current one. [More detail here](../building-on-zksync/contracts/contract-deployment.md#note-on-factory-deps)
=======
- `long_version`: the full `solc` version output.
- `zk_version`: the `zksolc` version.
- `contract/hash`: the hash of the zkEVM bytecode.
- `contract/factory_dependencies`: bytecode hashes of contracts created in the current contract with `CREATE`. [More details here](../building-on-zksync/contracts/contract-deployment.md#note-on-factory-deps).
>>>>>>> 9f8a9e6768f009dbbb4c254cdccc2e18312a7215

Unsupported sections of the output JSON, ignored by `zksolc`:

> - `contracts/<file>/<contract>/evm/bytecode`: replaced by the zkEVM object with only relevant data.

Reviewer 2: “object” here is ambiguous; does it mean “object code” or “thing”?

Author: A JSON object.

Author: Changing to `replaced with a JSON object with zkEVM build data`.
